linux distributions:
Redhat
Ubuntu
Centos 
Suse Linux 
Debian
Fedora
Gentoo
Mandriva
Slackware 

File system:
1. / => root directory 
2. home => home directory. 
3. bin => binary files 
4. sbin => System binary files.
5. etc: This contains config files. eg; sudoers,groups
6. lib: system library
7. proc: It contains the RAM, process and kernel info
8. tmp: It contains all the temporary files.
9. dev: it contains all the device files.
10. opt: optional. Third party software installation.
11. usr: Unix system resource. it will contain all the binary and libraries.
12. var: it contains variables files.
sys, mnt, boot, media etc: 

commands: 

mkdir direct1 

mkdir -p dir1/dir2/dir3/text.txt 
-p : it will create parent directory  if they dont exist

directory/file 
777
1777
0777
0400

Owner Group Others 

read - 4
write - 2
execute - 1

-m => mode 

mkdir -m 700 test 

-v => verbose 



Directory navigation
Command Utility
pwd Get the full path of the current working directory.
cd - Navigate to the last directory you were working in.
cd ~ or just cd Navigate to the current user's home directory.
cd .. Go to the parent directory of current directory (mind the space between cd and ..)
Listing files inside a directory
Command Utility
ls -l List the files and directories in the current directory in long (table) format (It is recommended to
use -l with ls for better readability).
ls -ld dir-name List information about the directory dir-name instead of its contents.
ls -a List all the files including the hidden ones (File names starting with a . are hidden files in Linux).
ls -F Appends a symbol at the end of a file name to indicate its type (* means executable, / means
directory, @ means symbolic link, = means socket, | means named pipe, > means door).
ls -lt List the files sorted by last modified time with most recently modified files showing at the top
(remember -l option provides the long format which has better readability).
ls -lh List the file sizes in human readable format.
ls -lR Shows all subdirectories recursively.
tree Will generate a tree representation of the file system starting from the current directory.


inode:file systems to store metadata about a file or directory, not the actual data.
An inode is like a label on a box that tells you everything about what’s inside — size, owner, permissions, and where to find the contents — but it doesn’t store the actual items (the file data).

The inode stores details about the file (metadata):
Who owns it
When it was created
How big it is
Where the actual data blocks are on the disk
The file name and the actual content are stored elsewhere.
The directory links the file name to the inode number, and the inode points to the data blocks.


it is a data structure that is created when file system is created.
- Owner and group infomation
- file type
- permission to the file
- date and time of creation, last read and changes
- number of links
- file size

 ...Metadata means “data about data.”
It’s extra information that describes a file, but not the actual content of the file.


Absolute path: gives full address of the file or dir starting from root dir(/).
always begins with /
it does not depend on ur current loc in the file sys, no matter where u are, this path will take u to same exact file or dir.
same loc evrytime.
/home/user/file

Relative path: is based on ue current dir.
does not start with /
uses symbols: . current dir
.. parent dir     ex:  ../file



File/directory create, copy and remove
Command Utility
cp -p source destination
Will copy the file from source to destination. -p stands for preservation. It
preserves the original attributes of file while copying like file owner, timestamp,
group, permissions etc.
cp -R source_dir
destination_dir Will copy source directory to specified destination recursively.
mv file1 file2 In Linux there is no rename command as such. Hence mv moves/renames the
file1 to file2.
rm -i filename
Asks you before every file removal for confirmation. IF YOU ARE A NEW USER
TO LINUX COMMAND LINE, YOU SHOULD ALWAYS USE rm -i. You can specify
multiple files.
rm -R dir-name Will remove the directory dir-name recursively.
rm -rf dir-name
Will remove the directory dir recursively, ignoring non-existent files and will
never prompt for anything. BE CAREFUL USING THIS COMMAND! You can
specify multiple directories.
rmdir dir-name Will remove the directory dir-name, if it's empty. This command can only remove
empty directories.
mkdir dir-name Create a directory dir-name.
mkdir -p dir-name/dir-name Create a directory hierarchy. Create parent directories as needed, if they don't
exist. You can specify multiple directories.
touch filename Create a file filename, if it doesn't exist, otherwise change the timestamp of the
file to current time.


File/directory permissions and groups
Command Utility
GoalKicker.com – Linux® Notes for Professionals 5
chmod <specification> filename Change the file permissions. Specifications = u user, g group, o other, + add
permission, - remove, r read, w write,x execute.
chmod -R <specification> dirname
Change the permissions of a directory recursively. To change permission of
a directory and everything within that directory, use this command.
chmod go=+r myfile Add read permission for the owner and the group.
chmod a +rwx myfile Allow all users to read, write or execute myfile.
chmod go -r myfile Remove read permission from the group and others.
chown owner1 filename Change ownership of a file to user owner1.
chgrp grp_owner filename Change primary group ownership of file filename to group grp_owner.
chgrp -R grp_owner dir-name
Change primary group ownership of directory dir-name to group grp_owner
recursively. To change group ownership of a directory and everything within
that directory, use this command.



